Blog - API Testing Using Playwright With Python (#349)
earthly/website: blog/_posts/2023-03-20-playwright-python-api-testing.md

Playwright supports API testing in Python in both synchronous and asynchronous ways. With the synchronous way, the implementation is more straightforward. You don't need to ensure that the previous code has finished execution before accessing its result. In addition, you're less likely to run into race condition issues when multiple processes access the same resource simultaneously. However, the test execution is slower than in an asynchronous manner. In this article, you'll implement an API test with an asynchronous approach.

## Prerequisites

To follow along with this article, please prepare the following prerequisites:

- A Linux-based machine (preferably an [Ubuntu machine version 20.04](https://releases.ubuntu.com/focal/); this article uses Ubuntu 20.04)
- A ready-to-use [Python environment version 3.7 or later](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

> - A ready-to-use virtual environment. You can use [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/installation.html#via-pip) or the [built-in venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Python virtual environment. You can use [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/installation.html#via-pip) or the [built-in venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).
```

![**Personal access tokens (classic)** page]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/cg41tcl.png)
</div>

Click on `Generate new token` > `Generate new token (classic)` to generate a new GitHub token.

<div class="wide">
![**OAuth scope settings** page]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/ZY3Uuik.png)
</div>

Check the `repo` and `delete_repo` boxes so you can create, update, and delete a repository.

Then fill in the name for your token, hit `Generate token` at the bottom of the page, then save the token value somewhere safe.

![**Generate token** page]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/VK3rsg1.png)

You will use this token when executing the API tests later on.

## Step 2: Create a New Python Project

From the `Home` directory of your machine, run the following command to create a new directory named `api-testing-python-playwright` inside the `Projects` directory:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
mkdir -p Projects/api-testing-python-playwright
~~~

Change to the `api-testing-python-playwright` directory by running:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
cd Projects/api-testing-python-playwright
~~~

Create a new virtualenv environment and activate it:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
virtualenv venv
source venv/bin/activate
~~~

> Using the `virtualenv` tool is a great way to create a Python virtual environment. Using a virtual environment, you can isolate the dependencies amongst different projects in the same machine, allowing you to create different versions of dependencies, and mitigating the risks of having dependencies conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `virtualenv` tool is a great way to create a Python virtual environment. Using a virtual environment, you can isolate the dependencies amongst different projects in the same machine, allowing you to create different versions of dependencies, and mitigating the risks of having dependency conflicts.
```

## Step 4: Create Functions to Make API Calls

Create a new Python file to store Python functions for making API calls:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
touch github_api.py
~~~

Open up the `github_api.py`:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
nano github_api.py
~~~

Then copy the following content to the file:

~~~{.python caption="github_api.py"}
from playwright.async_api import APIRequestContext

async def create_new_repository(api_request_context: APIRequestContext, \
                                repo_name: str, is_private: bool,
                                api_token: str):
    return await api_request_context.post(
        "/user/repos",
        headers={
            "Accept": "application/vnd.github.v3+json",
            "Authorization": f"token {api_token}",
        },
        data={"name": repo_name, "private": is_private},
    )

~~~

Since `pytest-playwright` offers two approaches for implementing tests: asynchronous and synchronous, you need to import the Python class `APIRequestContext` which supports asynchronous programming.

> You also defined the asynchronous Python function for creating a new repository on GitHub using GitHub API. The asynchronous Python function starts with `async def` syntax. Inside the asynchronous Python function, when making API calls, you need to add an `await` keyword before the calling functions so that when you work with the responses of the functions, your return values are ready to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also defined the asynchronous Python function for creating a new repository on GitHub using GitHub API. The asynchronous Python function starts with `async def` syntax. Inside the asynchronous Python function, when making API calls, you need to add the `await` keyword before the calling functions so that when you work with the responses of the functions, your return values are ready to use.
```

plugins: playwright-0.3.0, asyncio-0.20.3, base-url-2.0.0
asyncio: mode=auto
collected 1 item            
test_github_api.py .                                        [100%]

======================== 1 passed in 4.05s ========================
~~~

## Step 7: Generate an Allure Test Report

Now you have successfully executed the GitHub API test using Playwright. However, the default test report is difficult to read, and you may also need to send your test report to other team members to collect their feedback. To improve the readability of your test report, you need to use a test reporter like `allure`.

First, you need to install `allure-pytest`.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
pip install allure-pytest
~~~

Execute the test again using allure required parameters.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
pytest --alluredir=allure_result_folder test_github_api.py
~~~

## Step 8: View The Allure Test Report

To view the allure report, run:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
allure serve allure_result_folder
~~~

You should see the automatically generated report like below:

<div class="wide">
![**Auto-generated allure report**]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/verbR6S.png)
</div>

## Step 9: Add a Failed Test

> When implementing the test, there are times that your test will fail due to the wrong setup in the test. Let's create a failed test to demonstrate this scenario and see how we can fix the failed test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When implementing the test, there are times when your tests may fail. Let's take an example to demonstrate this scenario and see how we can fix a failing test.
```

You will add another test function `test_create_a_new_repository` inside the test file named `test_github_api.py`. Inside the test function, you will make a request to the GitHub API to create a new repository in GitHub, and check whether the returned status of the API is 201 or not. The status code number 201 indicates that a new repository is created successfully. You can refer to [Mozilla HTTP response status code reference page](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/201) for a detailed explanation.

~~~{.python caption="test_github_api.py"}

async def test_create_a_new_repository(api_request_context: \
                                        APIRequestContext):
    response_create_a_repo = create_new_repository(\
                            api_request_context=api_request_context,\
                            repo_name="test-repo",\
                            is_private=True,\
                            api_token=API_TOKEN)
    assert response_create_a_repo.status == 201

~~~

> ## Step 10: Use `allure` To Capture The Failed Message Then Fix It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 10: Use `allure` To Capture The Failed Message, Then Fix It
```

Let's run the whole test file with the option to generate an allure report to see the result.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
pytest --alluredir=allure_result_folder test_github_api.py
~~~

Then open the allure report.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
allure serve allure_result_folder
~~~

<div class="wide">
![**One broken test**]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/j9H6RYQ.png)
</div>

> From the allure report, we can see one broken test. Clicking on the "Suites" menu on the left panel, we see the test that has failed is "test_create_a_new_repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the allure report, we can see one broken test. Clicking on the "Suites" menu on the left panel, we see the test that has failed is `test_create_a_new_repository`.
```

".

<div class="wide">
![**The test that failed**]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/fRU0G6C.png)
</div>

> Clicking on that failed test in allure report, we see the error message is "AttributeError: 'coroutine' object has no attribute 'status'" and the line of code that caused the error is captured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on that failed test in allure report, we see the error message is `"AttributeError: 'coroutine' object has no attribute 'status'"` and the line of code that caused the error is captured.
```

<div class="wide">
![**Detailed capture message**]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/dnXMsv8.png)
</div>

> `pytest` complains that the coroutine object `response_create_a_repo` does not have a `status` attribute. Usually, the response of the API should always have a `status` attribute, even if the API is successful and failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pytest` complains that the coroutine object `response_create_a_repo` does not have a `status` attribute. Usually, the response of the API should always have a `status` attribute, regardless of the status of the API test. 
```
